Newsletters: add 144 (2021-04-14) (#550)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2021-04-14-newsletter.md

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #144'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2021/04/14/
name: 2021-04-14-newsletter
slug: 2021-04-14-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter FIXME:harding

## News

- **Taproot activation discussion:** since our last update on discussion
  about [activation methods][topic soft fork activation] for the
  [taproot][topic taproot] soft fork in [Newsletter #139][news139
  activation], the
  Speedy Trial proposal became the focus of attention among those
  interested in activation.  PRs were opened for two variants of it:
  [PR#21377][Bitcoin Core #21377], using a variation on [BIP9][], and
  [PR#21392][Bitcoin Core #21392], using a modification that became part
  of [BIP8][].  The main technical difference between these PRs is how
  their start and stop points were specified.  PR#21377 uses Median Time
  Past (MTP)---the median time declared in the headers of the current

>   and previous 11 blocks.  PR#21392 uses the *height* of the current

Reviewer: I don't think height (or genesis block) need to be italicized. I expect readers to be familiar with those terms.

>   and previous 11 blocks.  PR#21392 uses the *height* of the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and previous 10 blocks.  PR#21392 uses the *height* of the current
```

The median time past is the median time of "the last 11 blocks", or "this block and its 10 predecessor blocks".

>   block---the number of blocks between it and the *genesis block*, block

Reviewer: "between it and the genesis block" doesn't seem right to me. That'd suggest the first block after the genesis block is height zero, since there are no blocks between it and the genesis block.

Author: I agree, this was incorrect.  Removing this clause entirely based on https://github.com/bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io/pull/550#discussion_r611781386 (if we expect readers to be familiar with height, we don't need to define it).

    These tradeoffs between the two proposals, among other concerns,
    created an impasse that some developers thought was preventing either
    PR from receiving additional review and, ultimately, getting one of
    them merged into Bitcoin Core.  That impasse was resolved to the
    satisfaction of some participants in the activation discussion when
    the authors of the two PRs agreed to a compromise:

    1. To use MTP for the earliest time when nodes begin counting blocks
       signaling for the soft fork.  This is identical to the way
       [BIP9][] versionbits and [BIP148][] UASF started counting blocks
       for the soft forks they helped activate.

    2. To use MTP for the *earliest* time when nodes stop counting block
       signaling for the soft fork, with counting continuing until the
       end of the 2,016-block retarget period that reached the stop time.
       This is a change from BIP9 and BIP148 where MTP was used for the
       *latest* time when counting stopped.  The difference removes the
       ability for an activation attempt to go directly from *started*
       to *failed*, simplifying analysis and guaranteeing that miners

>        will get at least one retarget period to activate taproot.

Reviewer: Perhaps "miners will get at least one retarget period to activate taproot" -> "there will be at least one retarget period when miners can signal for activation" ?

    3. To use height for the minimum activation parameter.  This further
       simplifies analysis and also remains compatible with the goal of
       allowing multiple test networks to share activation parameters.
       Even though height may differ on those networks, they can all use
       a minimum activation height of `0` to activate within the window
       defined by MTP.

>     Although other discussion participants expressed their displeasure
>     with the compromise, the compromise PR has now received reviews or

Reviewer: repetition of compromise. Perhaps:

```suggestion
    Although some discussion participants expressed their displeasure
    with the compromise proposal, the implementation has now received reviews or
```

    expressions of support from over a dozen active contributors to
    Bitcoin Core and the maintainers of two other full node
    implementations (btcd and libbitcoin).  We hope this momentum
    to activate taproot continues and we'll be able to report additional

>     progress in a future newsletter.

Reviewer: 👏

    increasing or decreasing the work needing to be proved in an attempt
    to keep the average time between blocks around 10 minutes.  That
    means it's possible for a chain with fewer blocks to have more PoW
    than a chain with more blocks.

      Bitcoin users use the chain with the most PoW---not the most
      blocks---to determine whether they've received money.  When users
      see a valid variation on that chain where some of the blocks on
      the end have been replaced by different blocks, they use that
      *reorganized* chain if it contains more PoW than their current
      chain.  Because the reorg chain may contain fewer blocks, despite
      having more cumulative PoW, it's possible for the height of the
      chain to decrease.

      Although this is a theoretical concern, it's usually not a
      practical problem.  Decreasing height is only possible when a
      reorg crosses at least one of the *retarget* boundaries between
      one set of 2,016 blocks and another set of 2,016 blocks.  It also
      requires a reorg involving a large number of blocks or for there
      to have been a recent major change in the amount of PoW required

>       (indicating either a recent major increase or loss of hash rate,

Reviewer: s/increase or loss/increase or decrease/ ?

permalink: /en/newsletters/2021/04/14/
name: 2021-04-14-newsletter
slug: 2021-04-14-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter summarizes recent progress on code to activate
taproot and contains our regular sections with descriptions of a recent
Bitcoin Core PR Review Club meeting and notable changes to popular
Bitcoin infrastructure software.

## News

- **Taproot activation discussion:** since our last update on discussion
  about [activation methods][topic soft fork activation] for the
  [taproot][topic taproot] soft fork in [Newsletter #139][news139
  activation], the
  Speedy Trial proposal became the focus of attention among those
  interested in activation.  PRs were opened for two variants of it:
  [PR#21377][Bitcoin Core #21377], using a variation on [BIP9][], and
  [PR#21392][Bitcoin Core #21392], using a modification that became part
  of [BIP8][].  The main technical difference between these PRs is how
  their start and stop points were specified.  PR#21377 uses Median Time
  Past ([MTP][]); PR#21392 uses the height of the current block.

    MTP is normally roughly consistent between Bitcoin's main network

>     (mainnet) and its various testnet works, such as testnet, the default

Reviewer 2: "testnet works" almost works, but I gather it was intended to be "test networks"

    [signet][topic signet], and various independent signets.  This
    allows multiple networks to share a single set of activation
    parameters even if they have vastly different block heights,
    minimizing the work of keeping those networks' users in sync with
    mainnet's consensus changes.

    Unfortunately, MTP can be easily manipulated in small ways by a
    small number of miners and in large ways by a majority of hash rate.
    It can also revert to an earlier time even by accident during a

>     block chain reorganization (reorg).  By comparison, heights can only

Reviewer 3: Is the (reorg) bit necessary? Seems like that is a common enough reference.

    decrease in extraordinary reorgs,[^height-decreasing] likely

>     requiring the obvious and prolonged manipulation by a majority of

Author: Thanks for questioning me on this!  I think you were doubting "requiring [...] manipulation".  In process of writing a defense of that, I realized that there was a way to reduce height that was not "obvious and prolonged", so the concluding clause was flawed anyway.  I'll remove it.

    miners.  That generally allows reviewers to make the simplifying
    assumption that height will only ever increase, making it easier to
    analyze height-based activation mechanisms than MTP mechanisms.

    These tradeoffs between the two proposals, among other concerns,
    created an impasse that some developers thought was preventing either
    PR from receiving additional review and, ultimately, getting one of

>     them merged into Bitcoin Core.  That impasse was resolved to the

Author: I think "one of them" is an important part of that clause.

>     them merged into Bitcoin Core.  That impasse was resolved to the

Reviewer: I agree that this should stay.

    satisfaction of some participants in the activation discussion when
    the authors of the two PRs agreed to a compromise:

    1. To use MTP for the earliest time when nodes begin counting blocks
       signaling for the soft fork.  This is identical to the way
       [BIP9][] versionbits and [BIP148][] UASF started counting blocks
       for the soft forks they helped activate.

    2. To use MTP for the *earliest* time when nodes stop counting block
       signaling for the soft fork, with counting continuing until the
       end of the 2,016-block retarget period that reached the stop time.
       This is a change from BIP9 and BIP148 where MTP was used for the
       *latest* time when counting stopped.  The difference removes the
       ability for an activation attempt to go directly from *started*
       to *failed*, simplifying analysis and guaranteeing that there
       will be at least one complete 2,016 block period where miners can

>        signal for activation.

Reviewer: New wording seems good to me.

>        signal for activation.

Reviewer 4: Ah great, now it's much clearer. Thanks!

       allowing multiple test networks to share activation parameters.
       Even though height may differ on those networks, they can all use
       a minimum activation height of `0` to activate within the window
       defined by MTP.

    Although some discussion participants expressed their displeasure
    with the compromise proposal, its [implementation][bitcoin core
    #21377] has now received reviews or
    expressions of support from over a dozen active contributors to
    Bitcoin Core and the maintainers of two other full node
    implementations (btcd and libbitcoin).  We hope this momentum
    to activate taproot continues and we'll be able to report additional
    progress in a future newsletter.

## Bitcoin Core PR Review Club

*In this monthly section, we summarize a recent [Bitcoin Core PR Review Club][]
meeting, highlighting some of the important questions and answers.  Click on a
question below to see a summary of the answer from the meeting.*

[Introduce deploymentstatus][review club
#19438] is a PR ([#19438][Bitcoin Core #19438]) by Anthony Towns that proposes
three helper functions to make it easier to [bury future deployments without

> changing all the code paths][easier burying] that check [BIP9][] status:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changing all the code paths][easier burying] that check a soft fork's activation status:
```

(the point is to make these functions generic so they don't just apply to bip9 deployments - they also apply to buried deployments)

`DeploymentActiveAfter` to know if a deployment should be enforced in the
following block. All three work with both buried deployments and version bits
deployments.

The review club discussion focused on understanding the change and its potential
benefits.

{% include functions/details-list.md
  q0="What are the advantages of a [BIP90][] buried deployment over a [BIP9][]
     version bits deployment?"
  a0="A buried deployment simplifies the deployment logic by replacing the test
     that governs enforcement with simple height checks, thereby reducing the
     technical debt associated with deployment of those consensus changes."
  a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/19438#l-132"

  q1="How many buried deployments are defined by this PR?"
  a1="Five: height in coinbase, CLTV ([BIP65][] `CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY`), strict
     DER signatures, CSV ([BIP112][] `OP_CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY`), and segwit. They
     are listed in the `BuriedDeployment` enumerator proposed by the PR in
     [src/consensus/params.h#L14-22](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e/src/consensus/params.h#L14-L22).
     One could argue that the [Satoshi-era

>      softforks](/en/topics/soft-fork-activation/#2009-hardcoded-height-consensus-nlocktime-enforcement)

Reviewer 2: correcting myself per the style guide
```suggestion
     soft forks](/en/topics/soft-fork-activation/#2009-hardcoded-height-consensus-nlocktime-enforcement)
```

     are also buried."
  a1link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/19438#l-75"

>   q2="How many version bits deployments are defined by this PR?"

Reviewer: I'm not sure I'd say that these two version bits deployments are "defined by this PR". They are already defined in the code in master.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @jnewbery! You are right, https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19438/commits/994b0ce58f832da28adf90ab08ce2a7d6886cdae adds the `BuriedDeployment` enum but `DeploymentPos` already exists. That was an oversight on my part.

The question could be instead "How many version bits deployments are there? Where are they listed in the code?" and in the answer, "listed by the PR" replaced by "enumerated in the codebase"

Reviewer: Change looks good to me. Thanks!

  a2="Two: testdummy and schnorr/taproot (BIPs 340-342), listed by the PR in
     [src/consensus/params.h#L25-31](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e/src/consensus/params.h#L25-L31)."
  a2link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/19438#l-96"

  q3="If the taproot soft fork is activated and we later want to bury that
     activation method, what changes would need to be made to Bitcoin Core, if
     this PR is merged?"
  a3="The main change would be greatly simplified compared to the current code:

>      move the `DEPLOYMENT_TAPROOT` line from the `DeploymentPos` enum to the

Reviewer 2: maybe s/enum/enumerator/

     `BuriedDeployment` one. Most importantly, [no validation logic would need
     to be changed][burying taproot]."
  a3link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/19438#l-227"
%}

## Releases and release candidates

*New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates.*

FIXME:harding (none yet; will update or remove the section Tuesday)

## Notable code and documentation changes

*Notable changes this week in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo],
[C-Lightning][c-lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LND][lnd repo],
[Rust-Lightning][rust-lightning repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1
repo], [Hardware Wallet Interface (HWI)][hwi repo],
[Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay Server][btcpay server repo],
[Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], and [Lightning
BOLTs][bolts repo].*

- [Bitcoin Core #21594][] adds a network field to RPC `getnodeaddresses`

>   to help identify nodes on various networks (i.e. ipv4, ipv6, I2P, onion).

Reviewer 2: maybe best if all the networks are lowercased or normalcased, not sure which
```suggestion
  to help identify nodes on various networks (i.e. IPv4, IPv6, onion, I2P)
```

>   The author has also proposed that this sets the groundwork for a future

Reviewer 2: maybe s/sets/set/ or s/sets/lay/ (laying the groundwork) or could just "that a follow-up patch enable..."

Reviewer: I also hadn't heard "set the groundwork" before, but a google search revealed that it's about as popular as "lay the groundwork", so I didn't comment. I agree that "lay the groundwork" is slightly better.

Reviewer 2: > I also hadn't heard "set the groundwork" before, but a google search revealed that it's about as popular as "lay the groundwork"

Thanks! TIL

  patch for `getnodeaddresses` takes an argument of a specific network

>   and returns only addresses in that network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  and return only addresses in that network.
```

[Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay Server][btcpay server repo],
[Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], and [Lightning
BOLTs][bolts repo].*

- [Bitcoin Core #21594][] adds a `network` field to the `getnodeaddresses` RPC
  to help identify nodes on various networks (i.e. IPv4, IPv6, I2P, onion).
  The author has also proposed that this lays the groundwork for a future
  patch for `getnodeaddresses` that takes an argument of a specific network
  and returns only addresses in that network.

- [Bitcoin Core #21166][] improves the `signrawtransactionwithwallet` RPC,
  allowing it to sign inputs in transactions which have other signed inputs
  that are not owned by the wallet. [Previously][Bitcoin Core #21151], if the RPC
  was passed a transaction that had signed inputs not owned by the wallet, the
  witnesses to those inputs would be broken in the returned transaction.  Signing
  inputs in transactions with other signed inputs can be useful in a variety of
  situations, including [adding inputs/outputs to bump the transaction
  fee][Bitcoin Core #21151].

- [LND #5108][] adds support for making spontaneous [multipath payments][topic

>   multipath payments] (also called Original AMP) using the low-level

Reviewer: Perhaps italicize the new terminology:

```suggestion
  multipath payments] (also called _Original AMP_) using the low-level
```

>   `sendtoroute` RPC. Original AMP are non-interactive (or spontaneous) by nature

Reviewer: Is AMP the plural of AMP? I would expect:

```suggestion
  `sendtoroute` RPC. Original AMPs are non-interactive (or spontaneous) by nature
```

three helper functions to make it easier to [bury future deployments without
changing all the code paths][easier burying] that check [BIP9][] status:
`DeploymentEnabled` to test if a deployment can be active, `DeploymentActiveAt`
to check if a deployment should be enforced in the given block, and
`DeploymentActiveAfter` to know if a deployment should be enforced in the
following block. All three work with both buried deployments and version bits
deployments.

The review club discussion focused on understanding the change and its potential
benefits.

{% include functions/details-list.md
  q0="What are the advantages of a [BIP90][] buried deployment over a [BIP9][]
     version bits deployment?"
  a0="A buried deployment simplifies the deployment logic by replacing the test
     that governs enforcement with simple height checks, thereby reducing the
     technical debt associated with deployment of those consensus changes."
  a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/19438#l-132"

  q1="How many buried deployments are defined by this PR?"
  a1="Five: height in coinbase, CLTV ([BIP65][] `CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY`), strict

>      DER signatures, CSV ([BIP112][] `OP_CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY`), and segwit. They

Reviewer 2: Yes, good call :+1: also thanks for referring me to BIPs 34 (and 64--is it the right one?)

>      DER signatures, CSV ([BIP112][] `OP_CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY`), and segwit. They

Reviewer 2: Ah, 66 for the strict DER signatures
